Yn ogystal â chi, a allwn i'ch llunio'ch lluniau, fyddwch?
John Emilia Gibben
A'r dat o ddod?
30 March 1934
Yna, beth yw'ch lluniau pan fyddwch yn ymwneud?
Chocli
Iawn, a allwch chi ddod am y bach rhan?
Oedd yn nifer? A'r fath o'ch mwyaf?
Roeddwn i'n bwynt yn Bryn Amlwg
Ym Mhau?
No, yn Gosainen
A'r fath oedd yn y Tynworks
a'r fath oedd yn ymwneud.
Roedd yn gweithio yn y Madi, yn y Tynworks.
Roedd y fath oedd yn ymwneud.
A'r fath oedd yn ymwneud.
Rhaid, a beth o'r ddod o'r ddod?
Roedd o'r ddod o'r ddod?
Roedd Greetings Springjuan
roedd justice sub '' 一生延伏 ''
Roedd yn adellle
Ewrop Chatrum
Roedd yn ymwneud yn y golleri, ond nid oedd yn ymwneud yno.
Felly roedd yn dda iawn i gyd yn ymwneud yn y golleri, a'ch mwyaf yn y tîn.
Roedd hi'n gweithio pan oedd yn fwyaf?
Ie, roedd hi'n gweithio pan oedd yn fwyaf.
Roedd hynny'n gweithio'n ddiddordeb.
Roedd hi'n gweithio'n ddiddordeb.
Roedd hi'n ddiddordeb.
Lesachodd fy name.
Roedd hi'n chdym titio i fod yn anis ymlaen.
Y s plantation am ben oedd nhw i gyd i ni disseidio ....
Felly roedd hi'n ddiddordeb o Laboratory darnaf.
Gool يn Brotherец BCGsystiaid.
socio colaboratoon yma roedd hi'n ddiddordeb.
Tud hwn i ro'r boy good morning.
Pobông.
oherwydd y pêlwyr ddim yn gallu'i hyfforddi.
Felly roeddwn i'n mynd i ddod o'r ddod.
Byddwch chi wedi'i gael ei gael?
O, i'n mynd i'i gael, i'n gael, i'n gael.
Byddwch chi'n gwybod y ddod, o'n?
Ie.
Allwch chi ddod, ond byddwch chi ddim wedi'i gael ychwanegol.
Felly a beth wnaethch chi'n ei wneud pan ddod o'r ddod o'r ddod yn 14?
Roeddwn i'n mynd i'r llondri, yna.
Yna, i'r llondri.
Roedd y llondri yn Gosainan?
Ie, a yna'r llondri llwyf.
Roedd yn mynd i'r llondri yna.
Roedd y llondri yn bach, oes?
Ie, roedd y llondri yn bach, oes.
Roedd y llondri llwyf yna hefyd.
Felly roeddwn i'n mynd i'r llwyf llwyf yna oherwydd.
Roedd y llondri yn Gosainan?
Roedd yn Gosainan, oherwydd y ddod o'r ddod.
O, ddod.
Roedd yn y llondri?
Ie.
Nid, ddod, nid yn y ddod, ond yna yw'r llondri.
Dwi ddim yn gwybod yna'r llondri oherwydd.
Roedd yn mynd i'r llondri, nid ymwneud yn y llondri.
Mae'n ymwneud yn y ddod oherwydd yna, ym mhob.
Ym Mhob?
No, ym Mhob.
Ym Mhob, ym ym ym hodd.
Rhaid.
Rwa wy MY.
Menys yn gweithio yma?
Byddwn menys yn gweithio yma pa mor iawn.
Dylaiwa y math mentos gyhoeddus i leiawr a llwydol?
Oh individiaeth yصd, oherwydd fe'n rhan fyw, brush.
Dylaiw hoff y gwaith yn contributions o fewn.
imported to African splitters
content ofして
Body built for absolute settlement
Seeanç除ряu
Yn ogystal â'r gwasanaeth drwy'r ddryd, felly roeddwn yn defnyddio'r steinwyr.
Yn ogystal â hynny, yn ogystal â hynny.
Felly dyma oedd yn dda ar y ddwy?
O, yw'n dda ar y ddwy.
1948, 1950?
Ie, rhywbeth fel hynny, yw'n dda.
Felly roedd yna rhan o ffatri, yn ogystal â hynny, yw hynny, yw hynny?
O, yw hynny, roedd y ffatri.
Ydwch yn dda ar sut oedd yn cael?
Nid, dwi ddim yn gallu'n ddweud.
Rwy'n gwybod bod hi wedi bod yn llawer ond nid yw'n gallu'n gwybod.
Felly beth wedi'i ei wneud yn ogystal â hynny?
Ydwch yn dda ar y ddryd, oedd yn ymwneud.
Roedd yn ymwneud yn ymwneud yn 1955.
Dyna o'r ddryd?
Ie, ydwch yn ymwneud yn y ddryd.
Roeddwn i'n ogystal â phamlu ar ôl.
Ie, a beth o bach chi wedi oedd?
I had five, and when the little ones started to go to school then I went to look for a job.
And that's where we went me and my friends to go part time while the kids were in school.
So we went to Fish and Price first for a while.
So you were living now in Lichau this time?
No, Gosainan.
Gosainan.
Oh sorry no, I was living in Lichau then, I remember now.
Yeah, cos I was living in Lichau.
The house that we got was, my husband was born next door, so he hasn't moved far, so next door we were.
And his mother and father was living there.
But before we had that house, we lived with his mother and father before they had the council house.
Right, so the children, how old was your youngest child when you went then back to work?
Well they were in school I know.
Cos I didn't like to leave him on his own too young.
I should imagine he would have been a sixth nine, something like that.
What date was that, do you remember?
No I can't remember that date.
When was your son born?
1966.
So it would be about...
1973.
In the early 70s then that you went then?
Yes, cos I remembered after, it was 1973 that we were made redundant.
So that's what I remembered when I looked it up, it was 1973.
So your first job then in the factory was in Fisher and Price?
Fisher and Price, yes.
And where was that, where was the factory?
Well next door to Mettoys, so just about next door to Mettoys it was.
That's Forest Park?
Yes, yes, Forest Park.
How did you get to work there then?
By bus.
Sometimes if we might have a lift, but very rare, but we had to go for a bus then.
It was a service bus, not a works bus?
Oh no, a service bus, another works bus then.
So you went, you decided, two or three of you together decided to go?
Well two of us, yes, well three of us, but one didn't stay, she didn't like it, she only stayed one day.
She didn't like it, so my other friend and I stayed then for a while, but she left as well.
I don't think she went to Mettoys, I'm not sure.
The three of you went up together, did you have an interview?
Yes, we had an interview, yes.
So we had that, but it was part time it was, at 9.00 until 3.00, because we can come home for the time the children come home from school, see.
So that was a nice time, but of course when we went over to Mettoys we had to go full time, which was a problem, but we did manage it then.
Well, because the oldest girl, she was there to watch them coming home from school and she was there to like a moment of work, so they were all right.
Otherwise I would have to leave there if it was full time, because I was puzzling to stay really, because I was thinking of the kids there.
But my daughter and my son as well, they said they'd watch them, so that's the day then they went full time then.
So you were working part time, were there lots of others working part time?
Oh yes, a lot of us were part time, yes.
What did Fisher Price actually produce?
Wooden toys, the things like that, you know, well they're still selling them now, and they were good toys, the Fisher Price was, very good toys.
What were you doing there? Do you remember the exact job you were doing?
Well we were on the line, we were, see, and I can remember one thing we were doing, as the people who will remember, you know the dogs that you pull, we were doing them, we were, and I can't remember the other ones, we were doing a lot of them.
So do you remember what you were doing to this dog? Were there different parts?
Oh yes, different parts, everybody was doing their different parts here. I'm not sure what I will remember. I think I was putting the wheels on, I'm not sure.
It's on the line then?
It goes up to the line, see, until they come to the end, and then there's a supervisor then to see that there's no reject, and nothing like that's on it as well.
So did you have any training at all?
No, he didn't have no training.
Just told what to do?
Just told what to do and carry on.
Do you remember your first day there? What sort of impression did that do on you?
We were a bit nervous, because the foreman that we called was there, I can't remember his name. We were all afraid of him.
Because if the machine happened to break, we were afraid to tell him, because he didn't like the machines to be broken, so we were calling the boys then to come and mend it for us.
So that's what we went to do then. He's all right to work with, but don't get the machines broken. He doesn't like that at all.
Is that because he had to produce so much?
That's what I tried, as well, see.
So he produced so much work, time and motion, time and body, is it?
Yes, yes.
Do you remember the first day at all, or you don't remember that?
No, not really.
How many other girls would have been working then on the line in the room, in the factory? Was it very big?
No, the Pritchard Price wasn't that big, not as big as Mettoy's. It was very small. Well, not small, and it wasn't big. But Mettoy's was the biggest, well, it was.
How many women have been working on the line? Can you give us some idea?
10 or 20?
No, it won't be 10 or 20. It could be 10, but it won't be 20. Say about 10. 10 of us would be less, might.
Did you have to wear anything special to that?
No, no, I didn't have to wear anything special. Just ordinary clothes.
Did you wear overall at all?
Not unless you put your own on, like, if you had your own, yes. But otherwise, no.
So did they make that whole dog, or all the toy in the factory from beginning to end?
Oh, yes, from the beginning to the line up to the end, then, see. But they would do it as well, but I can't remember what others were doing.
So they must have got the parts themselves?
Oh, yes, they got the parts, and then we got to send them them, so.
They didn't make the parts in the factory?
No, no, we just got to put them together, like, see.
And then, was there a packing department as well?
Oh, yes, a packing there as well, at the end as well, see, after the supervisor or the one that's got that seat, or that is in good order, you know what I mean.
It's in good nick, then. There's nothing wrong with it, and then the packers, the packing map, then, see.
Right, because today, toys have to pass, you know, standard, don't they?
Yeah, yeah.
Was that the case then?
Oh, yes, they had to do that as well, yeah. They had to do that as well.
Right, so they were quite ffasibled with what you produced?
Oh, yes, yes. Oh, yes.
And so some of them?
Because any rejects, then, they put it in another box, then.
Do you remember how much you were earning at all?
No, I can't remember how much I was earning. No, it was very small.
So why did you decide to go into a factory rather than to a shop to work at that time?
I don't know, we just suggested to go to a shop, that's what they wanted to come, because I thought you would be no good in the shop.
There was lots of factories at that time, wasn't there?
Yes, it was a lot of factories. Well, yes, it was a loads down in, what was it, there was a sewing factory down there as well, and, oh, there was a few factories down there, really.
So you could have had a choice?
Oh, yes, I could have had a choice, yes, there was loads down there.
And what was the attitude towards, you know, women who worked in factories, were they all right to you?
Oh, yes, they were good, yes, we all enjoyed ourselves there and had fun as well. Well, we had a lot of fun there, it was.
When you were working then on the, when you had your wages, what did you spend your wages on? Was that something extra in the house, or was it the main?
Well, it was a bit extra to, well, towards, because my husband wasn't working then.
Ah, right.
He wasn't working then.
So it was less, yes.
Yes, because it was less towards the children and food as well, see, because, I mean, it wasn't much, but it was something.
Otherwise, if he was working, I'd had good wages, I wouldn't have bothered to go to work, but he wasn't working at the time then.
What was your husband's job?
Well, before he went bad, he was on the Ashman in the council, driving the Ash lorries, he was then.
And then he went to the steelworks in Pond de Dyles, Morgan and Rees, and then for a while, when he got better, yes.
So when he was ill, you know, that's when you went to work?
He went to work, yes, yes, that's when I went to work then.
So it was important then?
Oh yes, it was important, because you had five children then to bring up, then see.
So that's why I went out to work.
So when you were working, did you join the union at all?
Yes, we did join the union, yes, we did join, we had to join it then in those days in the factories, yes, we did join then.
Was there some part of the wage that was taken out for the union membership?
Oh yes, we were taking some of that out as well, and the stamps as well, but only half a stamp we were paying, because it was only part time.
We could have paid the full, but because we weren't earning that much, we went off of it then, so it was half a stamp we were paying then at that time.
Did you have to clock in?
Oh yes, we had to clock in, yes.
And clock out?
And clock out, yes.
So when you clocked out, did you stop working straight away, or did you finish a job when you were?
Oh no, well we had to finish a job first, and we had to get them out, they gave us a target to get out, and we had to do that target, otherwise you wouldn't have your bonus sort of thing, you know.
So we had to do that before we could clock out anyhow, but we did manage it anyhow.
So it was so much a day exactly?
Oh yes, we had to get our target out, they'd tell us how many we were supposed to get out, we got to try and get that out.
Did you remember how much that was?
No, I couldn't.
No.
And then the bonus was on top of your wage, was it?
Yes, if we had the bonus we'd go on top of our wage then, see, to build it up a bit then, yes.
And when were you paid?
On a Friday, we paid da da da.
In cash?
Oh yes, yes, we were preferred in cash.
And do you ever go to the office, or how were you paid?
No, they bring it out, they bring it around.
I don't know if the supervisors, they bring them around for you, in their packets ready for you.
Were you given pay rises, you know? Do you remember if the money went up at all?
No, I don't think, it was only that the bonus was making it more in the way.
If you can get the bonus out.
How many years did you work in Fisher Price before moving to Metoey?
I don't know.
Were you talking about four, five, six years or more?
No, it couldn't have been that. Say three years.
It was three years, I can't remember when they finished there.
So did you have holidays from the work?
No, I don't think we ever bothered with holidays.
Is that because you were part-time perhaps?
Yeah, could be, yeah.
Did you work in the holidays then, or did you have the holidays off, do you remember?
No, I can't remember.
No, I think we were working in school holidays.
Because my children were looking after the small ones then, I think we were working on school holidays.
So we were.
Right. Did you enjoy working there?
Yes, they were good and they were good. Crowd there, you know, right, those two them, yeah.
Did you meet up with them, you know, socially at all?
Oh yes, we went out for a meal and a drink sort of thing on Christmas time and we all enjoyed, yeah.
Don't ask me where we went, I can't remember.
But there was a load of us and we really enjoyed it, yeah.
How many, it was women mostly then?
Oh yes, women mostly, yes.
Were you supervised by a woman or by a man?
By the woman, by the woman, yeah.
Would you have liked to have been a supervisor?
No, too much responsibility on that, no.
Do you remember the supervisor though, was she quite strict?
No, they were good, no, no, they were very good to us.
They weren't nasty and nothing like that. If we'd done anything wrong they'd just tell us where we'd gone wrong.
Was it, no, you see it all in the factory?
It was a little bit, not much, mind you, it was, because there's machines there as well, like see.
So it was a bit, but not so much as all that.
And did you, were you allowed to talk when you were working or did you have to?
No, we could talk, yeah, we could talk, as long as we'd done the work.
As long as it was going out they don't care. Yeah, we were talking.
And I know you like singing, did you sing at all as you worked?
No, no, they didn't know I could sing.
And was there music on at all, do you remember I think?
Yeah, there was music on, but it was very cold there.
It was cold in the winter there, but they did bring the machines out.
I didn't know this gas, but it was very sickly and it was horrible.
That's the only thing we could have is to keep us warm.
And of course the summer then, they did bring us drinks around for us because it was so warm there.
We had a nice summer then.
And we were having free drinks then to cool us down a bit.
So what drinks were they then? Squash.
Squash, yeah, squash, let's see.
So why was it hot then there?
Well, it was glass up top as well, see.
So the bed was cold and the bed was hot.
What about the union then, did you come out and strike about that at all?
No, I don't think so. No, I can't remember coming out and strike there.
Was it in any way dangerous, you know, that the work, that you could hurt yourself at all?
You were talking about your mother and the tinworks.
Oh yeah, the tinworks.
Was there any?
Well, perhaps there could be.
There were some machines, if you could watch them, yes.
There were some machines that you've got to watch where your fingers and things are going.
Were you hurt at all?
No, that's the word, no.
Was there a nurse there?
Oh yes, a nurse was there, yes, a nurse was there.
So what did she do then, if there were people who weren't being hurt?
Well, she'd put her in her office and bandaged them up if they cut themselves or things, so they'd do things like that.
Or if anybody was taken ill, they'd send them home then.
So anybody was taken ill.
She was there full time, was she?
Yes, she was there full time, yes.
What about the working day now?
Trina, you're going half past nine.
Did you have a break at dinnertime or what happened?
Oh yes, we do have a break for dinnertime.
Yes, we had breaks there.
Did they have a canteen?
Yes, they got a canteen there.
But I was taking my own food, I was though, because I didn't care much for the canteen food there.
But I was buying some sometimes.
But my daughter, I was taking my own.
Did you have a break in the morning as well, and in the afternoon, because you were part time now?
Well, we did in the summer, because it was so warm there, we were having a ten minutes break, because it was so warm in the summer.
Ten minutes break in the morning and afternoon as well.
That's when we was over meadow, when we were doing full time then, when we were working full time that was.
But not in Fisher Price?
No.
Did the women smoke at all?
Oh yes.
What happened if they smoked? Do they smoke in the factory?
Oh no, they didn't smoke in the factory. They had to go outside to smoke in the factories.
Or in the canteen then, because it was those days.
Outside they had to do it, they don't do it inside.
You didn't smoke yourself?
No.
But the toilets, were there enough toilets there?
Yes, nice toilets there.
So there were men now, there were men working in the factories?
Oh yes, there were men working.
What were they doing?
Well, they were taking the toys and the trolleys and things, and I think some of them, because in the Metjoys they had paid things there to the wealthy to pay some of the toys, so mostly they were there.
But I think some of the women had been doing that as well, as I was told.
And some of the women were doing it as well.
Right.
Yes, in the paint shop there.
So if the men came into the factory, went in the lines where you were, did you tease them and provoke them? Was there a banter between the women and the men?
No, some of them, if we did tease some of them, yeah, they teased us back.
Yeah, because they were nice men, they were very nice. Yeah, we were teasing them.
What did you say to them?
Oh, I can't remember.
Are you not going to remember either?
Oh, I can't remember what you said to them.
But there was banter and fun then?
Oh yes, yes, it was more or less that.
Did they play any sort of tricks on new girls who came to the factory?
No, they didn't.
So you can't remember anything like that at all?
No, they didn't do it to us any of them.
They were very good to us, yeah.
And often they were showing us what to do.
So that's how you learnt, is you were watching others?
Yeah, and they were telling us, yeah.
No, they weren't doing anything like that.
Okay.
Then you moved on to METOI.
What was the difference between Fisher Price and METOI? What did you say? Was there something, did you notice a lot of difference?
Oh, yeah, as you see, a lot of difference, as regards for the toys, because METOI were making more cars and things.
When Fisher Price, they were making more different things.
And I fancy they were easy to make then, METOI itself, because you could put little things with the cars and things like that.
So what did you do in METOI? What exactly were you doing? You were on the line again?
Yeah, I was on the line.
What was that?
Were you working on the cars?
Some cars, I know.
Yeah, some cars. I'm trying to remember.
Oh, we were doing those tops, you know, you press down, they spin.
Remember those?
We were doing them as well.
Now, something's coming to me now.
We were making them as well.
I can't remember what else.
Those were made of metal?
Yes, that was metal, that is.
So we were making them there.
Not only cars, we were making other things, which I can't remember.
Cars we were doing and that top we were doing as well.
And what else were we doing?
Oh, and the roundabout, the swings on them, you know, we were doing them as well.
So this was much more smaller?
Yes, much smaller.
Not only cars we were doing, we were doing other things as well, there in metals.
So you moved around to different things?
Yeah.
Did you find it more for sea work?
Well, it is with the little things we had to put in, yes.
It was very tricky, some of them were.
Did you enjoy that better? Which would you enjoy most, the Fisher Price or metal?
Oh, no, I think Fisher Price was the best as it comes for toys.
And as a place to work?
Yes, it was good, yes, it was nice there.
Well, as it was, there wasn't many there, because it was a small place, see, so.
What happened then? Why did that close?
I don't know, I don't know why they closed.
I suppose they couldn't afford the materials or something like that.
And yet they are still making them.
Did the whole factory close?
Yes, all of them is closed down there now.
I don't know if there is anything down there now.
So METOI didn't take over the Fisher Price?
No.
They were next door?
Yeah, they were next door, see, they were already there before them.
I don't know how long the Fisher Price was there, mate, I don't know.
So with the METOI, sorry, with the Fisher Price, were you given any redundancy pay?
How long did you, when did you hear about it and were you given any pay and what was the difference then?
I can't remember, no, we didn't have redundancy from them, no.
It's only from METOI we had.
No, I can't remember that.
So you were told that it was closing?
Yeah, and we had to go over, well it's up to you if you want to go over to METOI,
but we did go for a while to part-time,
but then it came then that you had to go full-time.
So either that or you were actually left.
So quite a few left then, didn't they?
No, the few left them because that children there, because they didn't have nobody to look after them.
But me and my friend stopped for a while and she left as well, so I stayed on.
So how long were you in METOI for? Do you remember what time you left that? Left there?
Well, we were made to run, it was 1973, see, so.
That was from Fisher Price?
No, no, from METOI. I can't remember what year we went from Fisher Price to METOI, I can't remember.
But I remember, well I looked at that bit, it was 1973 that we were made redundant in METOI.
So I should have been about, I'd say nine or ten years there.
Alright.
Should have been, could be less, might.
Okay, okay. Were you given any sort of training at all of what to do in METOI?
No.
Nothing at all?
No, we just, they show you and then they stay by you to see that you were doing it right, like, see.
Okay. And were you, did you have to wear a uniform at all in METOI either?
No.
Neither of them, okay. And was that because you were working with metal and smaller things, was that more dangerous?
Or, or, you know, could you have an accident doing that, or?
No, I don't think so, no.
Because you know today, health and safety is important.
Yes, yeah.
Was that a factor then, or?
No, I don't think it was so much then as it is now. No, it was.
Okay. Would you say that, you know, that the working in METOI or in Fisher Price has affected your health in any way?
Well, it didn't affect mine any of it.
I don't think it has.
I know.
Right, okay. When you were working now in Fisher Price, did you work every day of the week, or was it just Monday to Friday, or what did you do?
No, we worked, we, first I wanted us to come in on a Saturday, we were going in on a Saturday as well to have, what do you call it now?
It was extra pay?
Yeah. Oh, I can't remember, oh, you call it now. Yeah, we were having extra then by going in on a Saturday, see.
That was something extra.
Yes, a bit extra then, see. Yes.
So there was shifts obviously in these factories.
Oh, yes.
What were the other shifts then? You know, you started at half past nine, did the other girls go off then?
Oh, yes, they finished then, no, they, well, at half past nine, they were half past three, it was supposed to be then.
They did have shifts there, they had afternoons and evenings there, see.
Did they have night shifts as well?
Yeah, they got night shifts at night, yes. Yeah, they got night shifts as well.
So did you have bank holiday off, you know, would that have been a, did you work on a bank holiday at all? Christmas and?
Oh, yeah, well, they'd re-hard them off, re-hard them off.
So the extra pay, the time and a half?
Yeah, time and a half, something like that, see.
Did you work on Sundays at all?
No, we didn't work on Sundays, no, only on Saturdays.
Well, there was no buses on Sundays then, you know.
No.
No Saturdays, yeah.
Right. You know, as a job, would you have said that it was boring or?
No.
No?
No, boring at all. I've got time to go, but it'd be boring.
It was hard work then, isn't it?
It was hard work, yes. It keeps you going then, especially if you've got to do your target, you've got to go quick.
Right. And you didn't have any choice about leaving either factory, both, did the METO close, is that why you, the factory closed, is that why you were made redundant in?
Yeah, they were making, yes, they were closing as well.
Yes, that was closing as well, see.
So both factories closed.
Yeah.
Ah, right, okay.
How did you feel about that? Did you feel sad that you were leaving?
Yes, I did feel a bit sad because I did enjoy myself there and the money was handy as well.
And was there sort of friendship with the other girls?
Yes, there was a friendship for them as well, yeah.
Have you kept in touch with some of the girls there?
No, we haven't. Some of them I've seen don't go saying then, but most of them are gone now as well.
So you didn't have a sort of retirement gift or?
No, no, they didn't give us that, no. They didn't give us anything.
And then did they have things like social club at all in METO, you know?
No.
No, nothing like that?
No, we didn't have nothing like that.
Football teams or cricket teams or anything?
No, nothing like that, no.
The bosses didn't bring people together at all?
No.
Did you see the bosses at all?
No, we'd never seen them.
Just the supervisors?
And the girls was always there, we never saw the men.
But the foreman was here?
Yeah, he was around sometimes, yes. If there was any problems with the machines that they had, he'd come and have a look at it.
So who mended the machines, would that be men?
Well, yeah, we got men. Well, some of them, my young boys would come there as well and ought to do jobs there as well.
Where did the other girls come from who worked there? Did they come from Goseinon, Lachau?
Well, when we were in the Fish and Price, they were coming from Port Talbot.
Some of them were, yeah, from Port Talbot. They had the bus then coming from there, see.
But they were all over the shop, really, but I know them from Port Talbot, because we were always together then on the line, like, see.
The majority of them is Swansea.
And the language was English, was it? Or was it Welsh at all?
I didn't hear anybody speaking Welsh, most likely there was, there might, but I didn't hear anything.
What about the Swansea girls? Were they, what were they like?
Yes, they were all right, yeah. They were all right.
I've heard stories about some of the Swansea girls. What do you think?
They can be nasty, mind, but they're good to work with, mind. Yeah, they're good to work with, but don't cross her.
What was their language like in the factory, you know? Is there a bit of blue language there?
No, no, there was nothing like that there, fair does, no. Nothing like that there, no.
Okay, all right. So, when you look back now at the days in the factory, what stays in your mind, you know?
When you look back at, your memory goes back to those times.
What are the most interesting or important things that you remember of that time?
Well, when I started in Fishing Price, in the way, making those toys.
That's what I can remember, making that little dog and things like that.
And the women as well, you know, going out.
And one time we were going in and they were taking us to...
Oh, what's that name now?
We had to go to another factory to do something there. I can't remember what it was, though.
But we had to have the best to go. But we never did anything there.
So, we enjoyed that. We were in the bus. I mean, friend in the bus we were.
Not in Port Talbot.
So, you were supposed to be showing another company, another group how to do things, were you?
Or just meeting up with them?
No, I think it's to show them how to do some toys there.
I'm trying to picture where it was.
But then we didn't get there. We didn't do anything in there.
We were sitting outside. It was a lovely day. We just sat on the wall talking.
We never went in the factory.
I don't know what it was. We were doing something inside a factory or something, so we couldn't do nothing.
So, we sat outside and we enjoyed buying ice cream. And that was some ice cream as well.
I can't remember what it was.
So, did they organise any trips out at all for you?
Like a trip in the summer or something?
No.
Any parties for children or anything?
No, nothing like that. Only that time we went out together for the Christmas.
What about if you wanted to buy some of those toys? Could you do that? You know you had children.
Oh yes, you can buy them.
Eh? Come on, was there any pilfering there?
Come on, I want you to look at this.
There might have been.
What might have been? What happened? Go on.
Well, some of them were taking some of the cars with them. But they were broken. No, they weren't what? They were called car proper cars.
They were seconds.
They were seconds. They were seconds they were. So, we were taking them.
They were borrowing these, were they?
Yeah, they were taking them.
But was there a shop there that you could go and buy?
Oh yes, there was a shop there. You could make them pricey, yeah.
Were they cheaper then?
Yeah, they were cheaper for us here. Because we were working there. You could buy them a lot of toys there if you wanted them, yeah.
Were you a friend in Llyca? Did they ask you to buy some for them for Christmas and things? Were you allowed to do that?
Oh yes, we were allowed to do that. If I tell them in the shop that they got such things then, they'd ask them,
well, no to get them for them for Christmas then. They were giving me the money and I was getting them for them then.
Were you getting them a little bit cheaper?
Oh yeah, I was getting them a bit cheaper then, yes.
Okay. But there was some pilfring going on there, wasn't there?
Well, second hand ones, aye. Well, they didn't want that so they might as well have it in that.
They were only thrown away, they'd be.
Okay, lovely. Okay then, I think that's it really.
That's it?